## Bioinformatics Core facility need {.page_break_before}

### What is Bioinformatics
“A hybrid science that links biological data with techniques for information storage, distribution, and analysis to support multiple areas of scientific research, including biomedicine. Bioinformatics is fed by high-throughput data-generating experiments, including genomic sequence determinations and measurements of gene expression patterns. Database projects curate and annotate the data and then distribute it via the World Wide Web.” – Encyclopedia Britannica

### Need for a Core Facility
Data generation in biomedical and life science research is exponentially increasing in volume and scale. This requires a strong support network to facilitate the acquisition, management, analysis, visualization, and sharing of data. A Core facility can offer a shared resource to provide bioinformatics expertise, reduce overall hardware and personnel costs, and minimize duplication events. 

### Overview of Core Facility Design

Core facilities have been implemented with a variety of designs depending upon their physical needs and the particular establishment. A multitude of models have been used for designing bioinformatics core facilites. Often these end up swinging towards the poles of "biology" or "informatics" that must come together for an effective implementation. A few implementations are described below, followed by the proposed implementation.

1. Diffuse model

A diffuse bioinformatics model is what often occurs without a semi-centralized or centralized effort. This avenue entails individual laboratories hiring and maintaining bioinformatics staff/equipment. As each laboratory is responsible for the staff, they are intimately familiar with the associated biology. This intimate association with the biology constrains the diffuse bioinformaticians to work in an isolated environment and operate with full expertise of the project. Inherent in this model is increased costs for bioinformatics across the university, as individual laboratories each have increased staffing, and each will purchase and maintain their own informatics tools- such as local servers, HPC units, and software licenses. Additionally, as these bioinformaticians are focused on the biological questions at hand, they more often are entrenched in a canonical academic career path within that domain-specific field, not within a bioinformatics service effort or assisting on projects outside of their specialty. 

2. Pure Centralized model

A purely centralized model would be designed to build a pillar of bioinformatics at a central site. Though this can potentially be very strong, it also requires the largest buy in- both financial and investigator usage. As this type of model is often integral in developing infrastructure to facilitate high throughput data, this model can skew towards the informatics aspects. Inherent in this model is a lower overall cost of bioinformatics across the university, as the centralized core can leverage economy of scale for purchasing power for informatics tools. On the flip side, this model is often the least biologically focused, and can create a divide between the biologists and informaticians instead of uniting as bioinformaticians. 

3. Semi-Centralized model **(Proposed model)**

The Core facility proposed herein shall be a semi-centralized effort. A semi-centralized design incorporates the strengths of both previous models by integrating into an overarching centralized infrastructure and providing branches of staff into semi-specialized workflows. One major downside to this model is requiring a centralized infrastructure team, which fortunately in this instance is already in place with the [Office of Advanced Research Computing](https://oarc.rutgers.edu/). By nesting the bioinformatics core within the existing infrastructure, the semi-centralized model gains the benefits of lower operating costs and existing informatics knowledge. The bioinformatics team can then focus on tuning the informatics to fit biological questions. With this, the bioinformatics team will have the availability to branch into data-acquisition specialities (such as genomics/proteomics etc described below), to then build a strongly collaborative environment with domain-specific investigators. 