## Core Start up Logistics {.page_break_before}

To initiate the core facility there needs to be a cohesive and aggressive start up strategy, with associated buy-in from individual units. This implementation will expand on the models used for OARC's development of the [Amarel HPC system](https://oarc.rutgers.edu/resources/amarel/), as well as experiences from [MaGIC's](http://www.bioinformagic.io/) start up. To disburse costs of staff, core members will be initially embedded in individual campuses. This will enable a 50/50 split of staff costs, with staff focusing their efforts to the embedded campus- while maintaining their efforts to general core development (IE pipeline establishment/maintenance). Through this cost sharing, the initial core staff will consist of 7 members minimum in an ideal setting:

- OARC-Embedded Director
- Busch Staff
- Livingston Staff
- Cook/Douglas Staff
- College Ave Staff
- Camden Staff
- NJMS Newark Staff

#### Estimated Costs for start up staffing of ideal setting

Item | Unit cost | Units | Total costs
--- | --- | --- | ---
Staff salaries (minus benefits) | $100,000-$125,000 | 6 | $600,000-$750,000
Director salary (minus benefits) | $150,000-$200,000 | 1 | $150,000-$200,000
Staff workstations/laptops | $8,000 | 7 | $56,000
Amarel nodes for staff (3 nodes/staff) | $7,078 | 21 | $148,638
Amarel storage for staff (25tb/staff) | $150 | 175 | $26,250

##### Subtotal costs of ideal setting: 
$1,180,888
##### Subtotal after campus split of ideal setting:
$590,444

### Development timeline

1. Establish primary analysis pipelines. For the top seen workflows (IE: transcriptome analysis, whole genome sequencing, de novo assembly, 10X single cell etc), primary pipeline development would be first priority. This will enable initial revenue flow to the core, and should be heavily coordinated with data generating facilities. This should be operational for primary tools within **6 months** of inception. 
2. Initiate SaaS development. Baselines SaaS tools will additionally enable a continual revenue flow based on the subscription model, and will enable investigators to dive in to secondary analysis based on primary analysis outputs. This should be at least individidually operational for primary tools within **9 months** of inception. 
3. Expand/promote current training opportunities. Working in conjunction with current training courses and workshops, begin to expand the general bioinformatics know-how on campus while establishing entity. Collaborative trainings should be operational within **12 months**, with novel courses and workshops appearing within **24 months**. 
4. Foster collaborative analyses. Alongside other development efforts, staff should begin to foster deep biological assistance collaborations with investigators. This will enable investigators to glean insights from large dataset projects prior to completion of investigator-enabled analyses. This should be continual throughout the development of this core, but at inception should be **<50% of individual staff's time**. As the core grows and other revenue streams mature in development, it would be expected to approach **~80% of staff's time**. As these collaborations grow, it is expected staff will be increasingly covered by collaborators/departments grants and other funds, reducing central/school costs over time. 
5. Expand team. After 12 months of operations the core shall be evaluated for time demands, with the expectation of prompt expansion if justified. If within 12 months of operations the core is >50% covered through revenue streams and staff time are overtaxed, additional MS/PhD level staff will be pre-approved for rapid hire. 
6. Internal training/SOP development. To account for additional onboarding and potential turnover rates, internal trainings and SOP development will be one of the initial priorities of the core director. These shall be established within **12 months** of inception, and will also enable onboarding of non-primary staff more efficiently, such as collaborative post-docs/graduate students. 

#### Idea credit
Ideas for start up logistics synthesized from meeting with [Paul Copeland](https://molbiosci.rutgers.edu/faculty-research/faculty/faculty-detail/80-c-d/134-paul-r-copeland), [Nir Yakoby](https://yakoby.camden.rutgers.edu/members/nir-yakoby/), [Aaron Milstein](https://cabm.rutgers.edu/person/aaron-d-milstein), [Ron Hart](https://cbn.rutgers.edu/cb-profile/rhart), and [Premal Shah](https://molbiosci.rutgers.edu/faculty-research/faculty/faculty-detail/88-s-t/220-premal-shah)